Created new section for RKE1 v. RKE2 difference highlights (#3947)
rancher/docs: content/rancher/v2.6/en/cluster-provisioning/rke-clusters/behavior-differences-between-rke1-and-rke2/_index.md

---
title: Behavior Differences Between RKE1 and RKE2
weight: 2450
---

RKE2, also known as RKE Government, is a Kubernetes distribution that focuses on security and compliance for U.S. Federal Government entities. It is considered the next iteration of the Rancher Kubernetes Engine, now known as RKE1.

RKE1 and RKE2 have several slight behavioral differences to note, and this page will highlight some of these at a high level.

### Control Plane Components

> RKE1 uses Docker for deploying and managing control plane components and the container runtime for Kubernetes. By contrast, RKE2 launches control plane components such as static pods that are managed by the kubelet. RKE2's container runtime is containerd, which allows things such as container registry mirroring (RKE1 with Docker does not).

Reviewer: This paragraph isn't clear to me.

> RKE1 uses Docker for deploying and managing control plane components and the container runtime for Kubernetes.

The thing is, Docker is a container runtime. (both docker and containerd are container runtime) And the controlplane is part of Kubernetes. (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/) Did it mean to say "RKE1 uses Docker for deploying and managing controlplane components and containerd for other Kubernetes components"?

> By contrast, RKE2 launches control plane components such as static pods that are managed by the kubelet.

This doesn't make sense to me - was it meant to say "By contrast, RKE2 launches controlplane components with containerd"?

Reviewer 2: No, I think it's correct to say that we use the kubelet. RKE2 writes static pod manifests, which are picked up by the kubelet. The kubelet in turn creates containers in the container runtime (which is containerd by default). RKE2 does not directly create containers in containerd in the same way that RKE1 creates containers in Docker.

Author: Updated, thanks!

> RKE1 uses Docker for deploying and managing control plane components, and it also uses Docker as the container runtime for Kubernetes. By contrast, RKE2 launches control plane components such as static pods that are managed by the kubelet. RKE2's container runtime is containerd, which allows things such as container registry mirroring (RKE1 with Docker does not).

Reviewer: sorry for this nitpick. but can we change 'such as' to 'as'?

> RKE2 launches control plane components as static pods

Author: Updated, thanks!

### Cluster API

RKE2/K3s provisioning is built on top of the Cluster API (CAPI) upstream framework which often makes RKE2-provisioned clusters behave differently than RKE1-provisioned clusters. 

When you make changes to your cluster configuration in RKE2, this **may** result in nodes reprovisioning. This is controlled by CAPI controllers and not by Rancher itself. Note that for etcd nodes, the same behavior does not apply.

The following are some specific example configuration changes that may cause the described behavior:

- When editing the cluster and enabling `drain before delete`, the existing control plane nodes and worker are deleted and new nodes are created.

> - When nodes are being provisioned and a scale down operation is performed, rather than scaling down directly, nodes are deleted and new nodes are provisioned to reach the desired node count.

Reviewer: what is scaling down directly? does that mean it would just delete one node from the node pool? I would expect node(s) to be deleted during scale down in any case so I don't understand how the behavior changed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When nodes are being provisioned and a scale down operation is performed, rather than scaling down the desired number of nodes, it is possible that the currently provisioning nodes are deleted and new nodes are provisioned to reach the desired node count.
```

For what is it worth, the cluster API folks have deemed this a bug and will be fixed in the future.

Users who are used to RKE1 provisioning should take note of this new RKE2 behavior which may be unexpected.

### Terminology

> You will notice that some terms have changed or gone away going from RKE1 to RKE2. For example, in RKE2, **node templates** have been deprecated, and you can configure your cluster nodes directly. Another example is that the term **node pool** in RKE1 is now known as **machine pool** in RKE2.

Reviewer 3: I don't think it is correct to call node templates deprecated. RKE1 provisioning will always use them, as far as I understand.

Author: Reworded, thanks!

> You will notice that some terms have changed or gone away going from RKE1 to RKE2. For example, in RKE1 provisioning, you use **node templates**; in RKE2 provisioning, you can configure your cluster nodes directly. Another example is that the term **node pool** in RKE1 is now known as **machine pool** in RKE2.

Reviewer: > configure your cluster nodes directly.

can we be more specific about how to edit them? can we say

> you can configure your cluster node pools when creating or editing the cluster.

Author: Updated, thanks!

- When editing the cluster and enabling `drain before delete`, the existing control plane nodes and worker are deleted and new nodes are created.

> - When nodes are being provisioned and a scale down operation is performed, rather than scaling down the desired number of nodes, it is possible that the currently provisioning nodes get deleted and new nodes are provisioned to reach the desired node count.

Reviewer 3: Would it be worth it to add: "This is a bug in Cluster API and they plan to fix it in an upcoming release. Once they do, Rancher will include these changes."

Author: Updated, thank you!
